hello how's everyone
feeling okay good good
um so um in my talk I'll be giving a
presentation about what dweb is which
you've heard about in our panel um about
half an hour ago uh you can read a bit
about dweb here on the panel but i' like
like to give sort of a um background on
where it came from um where it is now
and the principles that underg guard
this movement and I want to first thank
Barry Roxy Wade the incredible gray area
team here for having this weekend of
talks and conversations I'm seeing so
many familiar faces meeting excellent
new people and it's just really nice to
be reconnected um here in San
Francisco
so I want to start with the problem um I
don't think we need to disagree with the
fact that the internet in a lot of ways
is parasitic in the way that it sucks up
our data it sucks up our attention it
exploits every means of resource and
time and material for profit and not
only that our decisions about how we
interact with each other online and our
with our networks are completely for the
most part out of our control and no
matter how much corporations tech
companies say that they'll be doing some
good for society and obviously there are
some you know externalities in which we
are able to connect we are able to share
and um and talk about the problem of
problems of the world for the most part
they are not really in it for that and
that's get been proven over and over
again in their policies and in their
actions
and so I love this image of a um a kudu
plant has completely taken over this
healthy forest and I really kind of
started to think about how the current
Internet infrastructure feels more and
more like this and as a result of this
uh predicament that we're in um we are
in a situation where eight of the 10
richest people on the planet um come
from Tech um and uh this graphic was
from 2020 so it's trying to show the
wealth of the of the then richest person
in the world Jeff Bezos um so if this
one grain of rice is $100,000
US um this tiny little pile is a million
dollar a maybe um two handfuls of rice
is a billion dollars and this massive
pile of rice is $122 billion which was
uh Jeff bezos's nut wealth in 2020
however uh Elon Musk is now the richest
person um on the planet and his wealth
is 228 billion dollar which is twice the
size of that pile of rice um and so when
we think about power over our Network
infrastructure who controls the
materials who controls the um means in
which we are connecting on all levels of
the stack it's really clear that it's
been very profitable right and it's also
led to an immense amount of
concentration of control over our
Commerce over communication over news
everything um and so when I think about
um other ways of doing things uh this is
Andrew Carnegie in the turn of the 20th
century he was um the richest man in the
United States um he was a steel
industrialist he gave up 90% of his
wealth um by the end of his life
and um a large part of what he did with
that money was to start um many
foundations and many cultural
institutions but also namely started uh
3,000 public libraries across the
English-speaking World um United States
in the UK and elsewhere um and that was
because he believed in a free accessible
knowledge Commons for
all and um this is a picture of the
Oakland library that I worked at
sometimes um back in 2019 um it was
actually one of the original uh Carnegie
libraries you can go across the bay and
check it out it's the Golden Gate uh
Library it's very beautiful um and what
I felt like when I was working at the
Oakland Public Library which actually
coincidentally was when I was starting
to work on uh dweb organizing with the
internet archive was um seeing how a
healthy uh social infrastructure of
knowledge and Community could look like
very tangibly in front of me
um and so um I absolutely loved this job
when I had it um I was a library
assistant um worked a few days a week
and um you know I did everything from
answering Patron questions to pulling
holds off the shelves to checking books
out you know all the the library things
and it was amazing to see how much
people appreciate having just some
infrastructure that worked that they
could rely on where they knew they can
get information not only um with support
and assistance and uh with context um
often times but then also privately um a
major piece of of uh the principles
under gring public libraries is that you
have privacy um shout out to Oakland
Public Library as well because they um
have a really robust privacy um policy
for children actually um o over the age
of eight um and so there are these
things that really are embedded into
this cultural institution and to me um
that is actually a reflection of the
healthy organization that makes up the
Oakland Public Library and what that is
is of course the library staff um the
library assistants The Librarians the um
part-time folks every the people who
clean the people who do Story Time
volunteer everybody makes this into a
healthy community resource um but then
there's also the patrons there would be
nothing without the patrons coming to
Story Time coming to check out Library
the library book using the computers
they are an essential part of that
infrastructure and then there are the
unions that represent the library staff
so they represent the needs of the
library staff to make sure that they're
able to do their job well that they're
compensated that they have uh the um the
resources to do their job well and serve
their Community um and so I feel like
there's this incredible feedback loop
amongst the patron the staff and the
unions and when there was a a uh City
proposition on the ballot to raise a
living um cost or the uh the cost of
living adjustment for uh the salary of
Library staff workers it was
overwhelmingly passed like 80% passage
and it was um that that was because of
the the incredible relationship between
um these different stakeholders and so
when I think about this this was to me
an excellent example of what solid looks
like um so solidarity is an awareness of
shared interests objectives standards
and sympathies creating a psychological
sense of unity of groups or classes and
so um coming out of my work doing policy
where I was kind of confronted with tech
policies that were constantly being uh
driven by uh the copyright industry by
the big tech companies I was really
interested in seeing how can I help
cultivate an alternative economy where
it's not just about trying to regulate
companies into better Behavior but we
actually embed that into organizations
because they have that in their DNA uh
through their their um their bylaws
through the ownership of the
organization maybe through unions and
you have that in a way so that you can
be responsive and healthy to the people
who are using it and building that uh
infrastructure and so um the lens in
which I'm looking at this through and
you've heard the term I'm sure digital
Commons uh set a lot through this
weekend um is this idea of having a
pairing the the digital and the commons
and so um maybe when you think about the
idea of a commment you're thinking about
like a lake or the air or you know
Wikipedia um but what actually makes a
Commons a Commons are the social system
for the long-term stewardship of
resources that preserves shared values
and Community identity and so what's
really noticeable here in David bolier
who's a foremost thinker on the commons
is that it's about the social
relationships between the people that
are stewarding that resource a Commons
is not a Commons unless there are people
who care about it and are using it and
taking care of it and that's also uh
very much in line with elanar ostrom's
um uh conception of uh the commons she
was the first woman Nobel Prize winning
Economist um she did incredible lifelong
Research into looking at different
Commons all around the world across
Africa North America Europe um where she
observed common uh patterns of what a
healthy Commons look like so she had
these eight principles for a Commons um
and which she called common pool
resources and I won't go into those
specific ones you can look those up but
a lot of them again are about the uh
behaviors and the rules in which those
people are governing themselves and
relating to each other as stewards of a
common um and
so and so when I uh started to think
about this I was starting to kind of
collect these examples in my head um
platform co-ops was kind of the first
thing I kind of came across this idea
that an app or a website or a service
can be um
controlled because they're owned by by
the workers and or the users as a
consumer cooperative and so imagine like
if Uber was owned by the drivers and
this is actually uh something that does
exist in New York um uh drivers Co-op I
think is what it's called taxi drivers
Co-op um and so there are these examples
of platform
co-ops um there are cultural and
research Archives of course uh Wikipedia
is one the internet archive is one free
and open source software um I won't
explain that CU I think you all know
what that is um and then Community
networks which is this idea of Last Mile
internet infrastructure um so imagine
like here I guess Comcast or sonic being
owned as a Cooperative of the
subscribers or maybe it's actually a
public utility like in the same way that
you pay for water um but namely what's
really important is that the people who
are managing it and creating it have a
good governance model to um to use and
Steward this resource together this
digital resource together
um and so um elanar ostrom's eight
principles for Commons is a little bit
too abstract for me it's also not um
kind of it didn't feel relevant to me as
an organizer and so I've kind of come up
with my own little uh approach system uh
to think about that I keep referring
back to um in my work um and the first
is defining shared values the second is
build a culture of trust care and play
and three is establishing clear
boundaries around role uh roles in labor
so the first one uh defining shared
values um refers to um the fact that if
tech is not neutral this is something
that I always want to assert that um
much of the tools and what makes up the
internet has been kind of sold to us as
this like neutral passive thing that
we're supposed to kind of accept as the
way things are done but actually that is
not the case it's embedded with all of
the biases of the designers and the
engineers and again the profit motives
of the companies that built it and so um
my belief is that if it's not neutral
let's embed bias into it on purpose and
that bias being you know principles that
allow for people to well I'll get into
that with the D principles but um it's
it's kind of embedded in this belief and
I love this quote from David Graber the
ultimate hidden truth of the world is
that it is something that we make and
could just as easily make
differently so when I come at this from
a principes approach it's like how do we
want to make this world right and um
that's a conversation that's not I don't
think that's something that we can kind
of arrive at really quickly um
but with dweb we kind of started with
the community first so we kind of
started with um a series of Summits um I
kind of gave this history in the panel
earlier but it started off with the
summit in 2016 at the internet archive
and then at the SF mint um drawing
people together who wanted to build
something better to decentralize
Technologies decentralized power um of
our networks and um and really to to
Really Center the idea that we aren't
competing with each other we're trying
to build collaboration we're trying to
see how we all can play a different part
in that story um and we kind of evolved
into this idea of a camp um because uh
we didn't really have a hacker Camp um
on in California um and so actually it
was Brewster's idea Brewster kale the
founder of the internet archive who was
like what if we just turned the dweb sum
into a camp and so that's exactly what
we did with the leadership of Wendy
hanro who's here um we uh decid we found
this mushroom farm off the one Santa
Cruz California um and we brought you
know a couple hundred very um willing
risky individuals that we all that we
all got together with to create a
program outside mostly we built a local
network on the property and this
incredible just experiential
interesting uh experience and thinking
about okay if we're outside we're here
person to person what would it look like
to make an Internet that we want just
amongst us couple hundred folks
and so um we of course had to pause the
camp in 2020 um and during that kind of
L period um a few of us were saying okay
so we know what we don't like we don't
like that the internet is Corporate that
it's for our profit that it's exploiting
us but what are we actually trying to
aim for um something that I a
inspiration that I really had was
actually Corey Doo's um speech at the
first uh dweb Summit where he said we
need to tie ourselves to the Mast of
value we need to prevent ourselves from
being from Trading away our values um
for profit and defining what it is that
we actually stand for from the beginning
and building that into our networks and
so that's why we embarked on this
process of creating the dweb principles
um they there's five o overarching
principles technology for human agency
distributed benefits mutual respect
humanity and ecological awareness
and it was a process that took um more
than a year actually we uh interviewed
dozens and dozens of people core people
who are working on protocols like
ipfs um to uh Community Network folks to
organizers to Librarians and we just
tried to include as many people as
possible that we knew cared about this
and wanted to be part of this and went
to this very iterative process to come
up with these five
principles um I think because I'm
running out of time I won't
into uh any of these but maybe actually
just one of them which is we urge
coexistence and interoperability and
discourage wall Gardens so um it's kind
of a mix of uh technological values that
we want to see embedded it's also a lot
actually in terms of our Behavior so we
have a a whole um provision on Code of
Conduct about mutual respect um and so I
encourage you to check that out at getd
web.net principles um and you can also
become a signatory they uh also stand
alongside these other principles um we
wanted to show that this wasn't like a
whole new thing that we were actually
getting getting inspired by other
related principles and that we stand
alongside and solidarity with these
other projects to make a better
internet so um the second one um build
culture of trust and mutual respect is
really just in terms of our kind of
operating practice with dweb um we are
very open with people are like oh I
really want to volunteer and do this we
will literally just get on a call with
you and say okay great how do you want
to help us um and you you know can join
uh those folks will then join our call
or you know we're really really pretty
open about things um and it really is
about creating this culture of trust and
care with each other um and um and we
also embed that essentially in the
programming of dweb camp is really
important to us that we have an artist
track that we have a lot of children
there actually an incredible Arts
educator and organizer here in San
Francisco Andy Wong um leads this
Children's Program and so we really want
to try and think about not just the
technology and the protocols which of
course that uh we have in a lot of
incredible conversations substantive
conversations about you know
decentralized storage and um ownership
and all that but also we want to make
sure that we have those conversations
about the social aspects of of uh this
movement uh centuring children as the
people that are going to inherit this
network infrastructure in the future and
kind of really just have a culture of
play at the whole Camp um there's a a
ton of you here who have actually been
to dweb camp so um ask us questions
about the experience if You' like um the
last dwe Web Camp we had 530
participants back in June so it's really
kind of gaining momentum
the last one that I'll get into is
establishing clear boundaries around
roles and labor and that's something
that we really embed into this Pro into
my project compost so compost is short
for digital Commons post and it came out
of this um the problem that we were
publishing about dweb on centralized
platforms like medium and so my project
partner and I Ben Lao were like let's
make a whole Suite of tools that allows
you to take advantage of these exciting
new protocols like ipfs and hypercore
and even older protocols that are tried
and tested like bit torrent and be able
to share websites in any form um that is
in a way that's censorship resistant and
also um allows anybody without any code
to uh be able to publish and so that's
what exactly what we did um we kind of
created compost first as kind of like
the Showcase of what distributed press
could be but um distributed press is
actually the project that is building
the tools for no code publishing of
static websites to these different dweb
uh endpoints and so these two projects
kind of feed into each other and help
each other grow um we don't think that a
technology is um I guess like that
helpful if there aren't users of it and
so that's why we kind of created compos
so that there's actually artists and
people who are thinking about this
alongside
us
um yeah so uh just really quickly
something an exercise that we did before
we went into this project was actually
defining the values of the people who
are making this project because I was
like I don't know you guys that well so
I want to make sure that we're um in
line so that uh aligned on our
principles so when we are actually like
making this project we don't have to
disagree on some fundamental
things uh
oh okay so I think I'm almost out of
time but I just wanted to emphasize this
point with with dweb um this is
something that we're co-creating with
everybody and um something that is I
think
very obvious with the Internet is that
we are not invited as stakeholders we're
not invited to participate in the
development of any of these uh Services
the code of conducts the moderation
policies and so if we're actually trying
to decentralize networks that actually
you know it kind of requires us all to
do at least some homework if not
actively participate in building it
right it's not like someone else
somewhere else is going to do that for
us we need to participate in that
whether that is donating to a project um
any of the projects that were presented
this weekend um to you know talking to
us trying to collaborate with us um it
really takes all of us to try and make
something different and it's not
something that we can delegate to
somebody else I mean that we're just
going to make the internet again the way
that it is if that's the case I think
another thing that I wanted to emphasize
is that we can do it completely
differently right um I said this in the
panel uh before but we should make sure
that it's fun that we actually want to
do it that we're using the skills that
we each have that we want contribute to
society to each other and understand
that about ourselves and do that work
and make that fun and make it you know
communicate with each other well because
that's like that's completely what has
been done wrong right up until this
point if we're making this other world
we need to be doing that work up until
we're um actually manifesting these
networks so yeah so again help us shape
what dweb is by taking the curriculum by
by joining the conversation by coming to
dweb camp we will be in the forest again
next summer so we actually have dates
for dweb uh Camp you've you've heard it
here first August 7th through 11 2024 in
uh Camp Navaro we're also talking to
some Partners who are planning dweb Camp
Europe in May so stay tuned for that um
and we also have ongoing virtual meetups
so you can join those as well
here are just some links to follow
compost um we have three issues we're on
Instagram
Macedon um not really on Twitter x uh
for obvious reasons but that's it
thanks